Add August 2022 Update Post (#4)
managarm/managarm.github.io: _posts/2022-08-14-aug-update.markdown

---
layout: post
title: "Managarm: August 2022 Update"
excerpt:
---
<span style="font-size: 11pt;">Post by
Arsen Arsenović ([@ArsenArsen](https://github.com/ArsenArsen)),
Dennis Bonke ([@Dennisbonke](https://github.com/Dennisbonke)),
Geert Custers ([@geertiebear](https://github.com/geertiebear)),
Alexander van der Grinten ([@avdgrinten](https://github.com/avdgrinten)),

> Matt Taylor ([@64](https://github.com/64))

Reviewer: Are we mentioning Leo here? :smile:

Reviewer 2: Originally it was only the people that worked on the post, tho that was months ago. Not against adding Leo to the list.

### Rust Support in User Space

Project member [@64](https://github.com/64) has been working to bring Rust to Managarm. So far, this has consisted of:
* Adding information about our `x86_64-unknown-managarm-system` target to [rustc](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust) (so that it can link with our LLVM and such). This initial work was done by [@avdgrinten](https://github.com/avdgrinten).
* Adding bindings for [mlibc](https://github.com/managarm/mlibc) in Rust's [libc](https://github.com/rust-lang/libc) crate ([managarm/bootstrap-managarm#96](https://github.com/managarm/bootstrap-managarm/pull/96/files#diff-3d13f40b9e85b21978241de17ebb802857f04bf1af5b1f0d80f1c76f50d040d2)).
* Patching Rust's standard library to support Managarm, and stubbing out functionality that we do not implement yet ([managarm/bootstrap-managarm#96](https://github.com/managarm/bootstrap-managarm/pull/96/files#diff-b086cf11aa261f991d7eb66b8164907ad9ee5bc4165cbc1739d65fcd2607be78)).
* Integrating [cargo](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo) with our build system so that we can cross-compile crates for Managarm ([managarm/xbstrap#48](https://github.com/managarm/xbstrap/pull/48)).

> * Porting [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) and [exa](https://github.com/ogham/exa) ([managarm/bootstrap-managarm#102](https://github.com/managarm/bootstrap-managarm/pull/102)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Porting [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep), [exa](https://github.com/ogham/exa) and [alacritty](https://github.com/alacritty/alacritty) ([managarm/bootstrap-managarm#102](https://github.com/managarm/bootstrap-managarm/pull/102), [managarm/bootstrap-managarm#180](https://github.com/managarm/bootstrap-managarm/pull/180)).
```

Reviewer 2: As noted elsewhere, I'd rather not add alacritty and move this to the next one. That decision, however, isn't up to me.

Reviewer: Well, it's a little odd to call it the August 2022 post if we're only talking about things that happened before January

Reviewer 2: Agree. Hence why I wanted it out in January. However, we need to be weird somewhere or have an end of year post of 4 months of work. Also, if we want this to be accurate to current work, more content needs to be written, leading to delays, and I want it out ASAP.

> There is still work to be done before all of Rust's standard library is fully supported within Managarm. Notably, thread creation hits unimplemented code paths within [mlibc](https://github.com/managarm/mlibc), but this is our next priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is still work to be done before all of Rust's standard library is fully supported within Managarm. Our next priority is upstreaming our patches back into the Rust ecosystem, since maintaining these downstream has turned out to be quite a struggle.
```

## New Ports and Port Updates

In the last two years, we received a lot of new and sometimes updated ports, our collection contains over 250 ports now! A lot of the ports are various nice-to-have things, such as common UNIX utilities like `grep`, `sed`, `findutils` and `gawk`, development tools like `python`, `make` and `patch` and we got enough of the X11 stack ported to run XWayland and several X based apps like `xclock` and `gtklife`. Another noteworthy thing to mention here is the addition of a new bootloader called [limine](https://limine-bootloader.org/), which we now use by default (although `grub` is still supported at this time and there are no plans to remove that support) and the addition of a stripped down `util-linux` port, which includes useful utilities like `mount` and `losetup`.

As a blog post without images would be boring, here are some screenshots, first off is Managarm running `python`.
![python](/assets/2022-aug-update/python.png)
After that, we have `xclock`.
![xclock](/assets/2022-aug-update/xclock.png)
And finally we have `exa` running.

> ![exa](/assets/2022-aug-update/exa.png)

Reviewer: Perhaps @Dennisbonke wants to add a screenshot of chromium here?

Reviewer 3: I think we only want to show case things that are upstreamed here.

Reviewer 2: And before anyone mentions it, Qt6 will be discussed in the next update post (end of year 2022 is the planning). And qookie is right, only upstreamed items are mentioned.

![gtk2](/assets/2022-aug-update/gtk2.png)

Outside of XWayland, work is ongoing to also run the classic X.Org server, while using its own DRM-based mode setting (instead of Weston's).

### QEMU
Most of the pieces necessary for QEMU have already been in place, with the exception of `sigaltstack` and partial `munmap`/`mmap`/`mprotect` support. With both of these missing features implemented, we can run QEMU on Managarm, bringing us one step closer to being self-hosting.

![qemu](/assets/2022-aug-update/qemu.png)

### DOOM
Until recently, we did not have any DOOM port, mainly because we could not decide on which source port to use. We eventually decided upon dsda-doom, giving us a modern, yet vanilla DOOM experience, with extra speedrunning features as a bonus.

![doom](/assets/2022-aug-update/doom.png)

> ## What do we want to achieve in 2022?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What do we want to achieve in the next year?
```

**Finish porting xbps.** As mentioned above, considerable work went into porting the xbps package manager. While the general infrastructure, both inside Managarm and outside in terms of an repository, are set up, some more work is required to actually get `xbps` to function properly. We aim to implement the missing functionality soon.

**Polish the port collection.** Currently, we have a lot of ports that work at least partially, but some ports use pretty ugly hacks to get to that state. We should strive to get the quality of these ports up by improving functionality within mlibc and by removing hacks. This also includes adding better tests to check for correctness. We also plan to start upstreaming support patches such that we can remove some patches from the collection.

**Complete TTY subsystem.** We currently lack or incorrectly implement many TTY subsystem features (sessions and signals, process groups, et cetera), which are quite necessary for many kinds of programs as well as day-to-day life using the system. This goal is also accompanied by finishing up Unix process credentials and signals.

> 

Reviewer: @Dennisbonke: add something about browsers here?

Reviewer 2: Nope. I want no major content changes at all. Ideally I'd not talk about things after January 2022 as to keep content for the end of 2022 post but what can you do about it. I'll write some browser stuff for the next post.
